# **Argentine Sign Language: A Comprehensive Linguistic Investigation for AI-Driven Translation**

**1. Introduction to Argentine Sign Language (LSA)**

Argentine Sign Language (LSA), known in Spanish as *Lengua de Señas
Argentina*, serves as the primary and natural means of communication for
the Deaf community throughout Argentina.^1^ It is more than a mere
collection of gestures; it constitutes a fully developed language,
complete with its own intricate structure and profound cultural
significance.^2^ This distinction is paramount for the accurate
translation of videos into LSA, as it necessitates that any
technological approach, such as the AI-driven methods being explored,
moves beyond simple gesture recognition to achieve genuine linguistic
interpretation. The nuances of LSA, deeply embedded in its grammatical
rules and cultural context, demand a level of understanding that mirrors
the complexities of spoken languages.

This report is specifically designed to support the user\'s project,
which aims to translate videos into LSA utilizing Gemini Pro 2.5\'s
innovative video analysis capabilities. The success of such an endeavor
is intrinsically linked to the comprehensiveness and accuracy of the LSA
data upon which the AI model is trained. Incomplete or flawed data will
inevitably lead to inaccurate transcriptions, thereby hindering
effective communication and potentially misrepresenting the intended
message. Therefore, a thorough investigation into the various facets of
LSA is essential to provide the AI with the necessary foundation for
precise and culturally sensitive translations.

The scope of this report encompasses a detailed exploration of Argentine
Sign Language. Its objectives are to provide a thorough understanding of
LSA by examining its historical evolution, dissecting its unique
linguistic structure, elucidating its cultural context within the
Argentine Deaf community, cataloging available lexical and research
resources, and analyzing the inherent challenges in its translation and
interpretation. Ultimately, this comprehensive investigation aims to
equip the user with the expert-level knowledge required to effectively
integrate LSA data into their AI-driven video translation project,
fostering more accurate and meaningful communication.

**2. The Historical and Sociolinguistic Landscape of LSA**

The origins of Argentine Sign Language trace back through a significant
history, with its formal recognition as a distinct language gaining
considerable momentum around the 1960s.^2^ This period saw the rise of
linguistic studies that began to unravel the inherent structure and
complexity of sign languages, including LSA. A pivotal moment in the
formal study of LSA occurred in 1994 with the publication of the first
comprehensive analysis of its grammar, authored by Dr. María Ignacia
Massone and Emilia Margarita Machado.^4^ Earlier, between 1880 and 1910,
the establishment of the first school for the Deaf in Buenos Aires,
known as Bartolomé Ayrolo, played an unquantifiable role in the organic
development and initial codification of the language within the Deaf
community.^5^ The relatively recent formal study and recognition of LSA
indicate that the field is still progressing, with ongoing research
continuously contributing to a more profound understanding of its
intricacies. This underscores the importance of current linguistic
findings for anyone seeking a comprehensive grasp of LSA.

Several key milestones mark the journey towards the recognition and
standardization of LSA in Argentina. August 29th holds particular
significance as the Day of Argentine Sign Language, a date chosen to
commemorate the pivotal 1987 meeting where various Deaf associations
convened to discuss and formally designate the name for the language
used by deaf individuals in Argentina.^6^ Following this, in 1989,
academic circles began to formally acknowledge LSA, largely due to
linguistic research that provided irrefutable evidence of its status as
a genuine language, possessing all the structural and expressive
capabilities of spoken languages.^6^ This academic validation paved the
way for even greater recognition, culminating in the enactment of Law N°
27.710 in 2023. This landmark legislation officially recognizes LSA as a
natural and original language, integral to Argentina\'s intangible
historical legacy and a fundamental component of the nation\'s
linguistic identity.^3^ Throughout this journey, the Argentine
Confederation of the Deaf (CAS), known as *Confederación Argentina de
Sordos*, has played a central and unwavering role in advocating for the
official recognition of LSA and championing the broader rights of the
Deaf community in Argentina.^9^ The legal recognition of LSA signifies a
monumental step towards greater inclusivity within Argentine society. It
formally acknowledges the profound importance of LSA for the Deaf
community, ensuring their access to fundamental rights and essential
information in their native language. The active involvement of CAS in
this process highlights the critical role of community advocacy in
achieving language recognition and promoting linguistic equality.

The legal framework established by Law 27.710 provides a robust
foundation for promoting the widespread use and deeper understanding of
LSA across various sectors of Argentine society. The law explicitly
recognizes LSA as a natural language characterized by a complete and
complex grammatical structure that is distinctly different from that of
spoken Spanish.^8^ This formal recognition guarantees the fundamental
right of deaf individuals to utilize LSA for all aspects of
communication, including accessing information, effectively defending
their rights, and fostering a positive linguistic and cultural identity
that enables their full participation and integration into all facets of
social life.^8^ Furthermore, the legislation mandates that the Argentine
government actively ensures communication accessibility in all public
policies directed towards the broader society and to proactively promote
the personal independence, autonomy, and decision-making abilities of
deaf individuals.^8^ In a significant move to ensure community
involvement and expertise in matters concerning LSA, the law designates
organizations that are entirely constituted by deaf individuals as the
official consultative bodies on all issues related to the language.^8^
This legal framework underscores the commitment to not only recognizing
LSA but also to actively supporting its use and ensuring the Deaf
community\'s central role in shaping policies and practices related to
their language.

**3. The Grammatical and Syntactic Foundations of LSA**

Argentine Sign Language possesses a unique and intricate grammatical
structure that distinguishes it as a fully formed and independent
language.^2^ Unlike spoken languages that primarily rely on the auditory
channel, LSA operates within the visual and gestural realm.^2^ Its
articulation involves not just the hands, but also the arms, the trunk
of the body, and the myriad expressive capabilities of the face.^2^
Indeed, facial expressions in LSA are not mere emotional indicators but
are integral components of the language itself, often conveying
grammatical information.^2^ The formal linguistic study of this complex
system began in earnest in 1994, providing the first systematic analysis
of LSA grammar.^4^ Since then, ongoing research continues to delve
deeper into its various aspects, including its lexicon, grammatical
rules, and how it is used in discourse.^4^ Understanding these
fundamental differences between LSA and spoken languages, particularly
Spanish, is crucial for any attempt at accurate AI-driven translation.
The visual-gestural nature of LSA and the significant role played by
non-manual markers must be carefully considered in the design and
training of any AI model aiming to interpret and translate this rich
language.

One of the most fundamental aspects of LSA grammar is its
Subject-Object-Verb (SOV) word order.^4^ This structure stands in
contrast to the Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) order that is typical of
spoken Spanish. For instance, where a Spanish speaker might say \"El
perro corre la pelota\" (The dog runs the ball), a signer using LSA
would typically structure this as \"Perro pelota corre\" (Dog ball
runs). This difference in word order is not arbitrary; it is a core
feature of LSA syntax that conveys grammatical relationships.
Furthermore, in interrogative sentences in LSA, the marker indicating a
question is generally placed at the very end of the sentence.^4^ For
example, to ask \"What is your name?\", the LSA equivalent would follow
a structure closer to \"Name yours what?\". This fundamental difference
in word order has significant implications for AI translation. An AI
model trained primarily on Spanish sentence structure would likely
produce grammatically incorrect LSA translations if it simply
substitutes Spanish words with their corresponding signs without
rearranging them according to LSA\'s SOV pattern. Therefore, the AI
model must be explicitly trained to recognize and produce the correct
word order when translating between Spanish and LSA.

Beyond the manual signs themselves, non-manual markers play a pivotal
role in conveying grammatical information in LSA.^2^ These visual cues,
which include facial expressions, head movements, and body posture, are
not merely supplementary to the manual signs; they are integral to the
grammatical structure and meaning of LSA. For example, negation in LSA
is often indicated by a headshake and a specific facial expression,
typically appearing at the end of the signed sentence.^12^ Similarly,
the act of asking a question is often marked by raised eyebrows and a
forward tilt of the head, also frequently occurring at the sentence\'s
conclusion.^12^ Furthermore, elements within a sentence can be
emphasized or topicalized by placing them at the beginning of the
utterance and marking them with raised eyebrows and a slight head
movement.^4^ These non-manual markers are not just emotional cues; they
carry significant grammatical weight and can alter the meaning of a
signed utterance. For an AI model to accurately translate LSA, it must
be capable of analyzing and interpreting these visual cues. This
requires sophisticated video analysis capabilities that can detect and
process subtle movements and expressions of the face and body,
recognizing them not just as visual features but as meaningful
components of the LSA grammar.

A comparison of LSA grammar with Spanish reveals several key structural
differences that underscore LSA\'s status as an independent language.
One notable difference is the complete absence of articles (such as
\"el,\" \"la,\" \"los,\" \"las,\" \"un,\" \"una,\" \"unos,\" \"unas\")
in LSA.^4^ Where Spanish relies heavily on articles to specify nouns,
LSA conveys definiteness and indefiniteness through other means, such as
context or the use of specific classifiers. Similarly, the expression of
gender (masculine or feminine) and number (singular or plural) in LSA
typically does not involve grammatical markers attached to nouns as it
does in Spanish. Instead, these features are often indicated by separate
signs, such as the signs for \"woman\" or \"man\" to denote gender, or
the sign for \"many\" to indicate plurality.^13^ Furthermore, the
Spanish verbs \"ser\" (to be) and \"estar\" (to be) often do not have
direct signed equivalents in LSA. Instead, the concept of \"being\" is
often conveyed through the use of temporal adverbs or simply implied by
the context.^12^ Tense in LSA is typically marked explicitly using signs
for past, present, or future rather than through verb conjugations as in
Spanish.^12^ Finally, while Spanish requires explicit subject pronouns,
LSA often omits them, as the subject is either clear from the context or
indicated through verb agreement or spatial referencing.^4^ These
structural differences highlight that LSA is not merely a manual
representation of Spanish but possesses its own unique set of
grammatical rules. Therefore, an AI model designed for translation must
be trained to recognize and account for these fundamental distinctions,
moving beyond a simple word-for-sign approach to truly understand and
generate grammatically correct LSA.

**4. Lexical Resources and Knowledge Bases for LSA**

To effectively support AI-driven translation of videos into Argentine
Sign Language, access to comprehensive lexical resources and knowledge
bases is paramount. Fortunately, several valuable resources exist that
can contribute significantly to this endeavor. One of the most notable
is the first digital dictionary of LSA, a groundbreaking project
developed by the National University of Cuyo (UNCuyo).^14^ This
extensive online resource contains over 4,000 video entries, making it a
substantial repository of LSA vocabulary.^14^ Uniquely, this digital
dictionary prioritizes visual access, utilizing images and videos to
convey the meaning of signs rather than relying on Spanish definitions
as the primary point of entry.^14^ This approach aligns perfectly with
the visual nature of LSA and makes it particularly accessible to the
Deaf community. The dictionary can be accessed online at
[[https://www.diccionariodigitallsa.com/]{.underline}](https://www.diccionariodigitallsa.com/).^14^
Recognizing the importance of making LSA resources widely available, the
National Library of Teachers also offers a downloadable LSA dictionary,
providing another avenue for accessing lexical information.^18^

Beyond comprehensive dictionaries, specific projects have focused on
creating targeted LSA resources. The Argentine Confederation of the Deaf
(CAS) has developed the \"Señario\" project, a valuable initiative aimed
at promoting LSA education and accessibility.^19^ The first volume of
\"Señario\" comprises a basic dictionary containing 230 frequently used
lexical entries in LSA, along with their written Spanish
equivalents.^19^ These entries are thoughtfully organized into ten
thematic categories, including greetings, basic communication signs, the
manual alphabet, school-related signs, numbers, provinces, family,
sports, games, colors, and climate.^19^ For each lexical entry, the
\"Señario\" provides not only photographs and videos of the
corresponding LSA sign or expression but also colorful illustrations to
aid understanding.^19^ To further enhance accessibility, the project
incorporates QR codes that directly link to the video of each sign or
expression in LSA.^19^ In addition to the vocabulary entries, each
thematic category in \"Señario\" includes cultural notes, offering basic
yet important information about the Deaf community in Argentina.^19^
Recognizing the need for resources tailored to younger learners, the
second volume of the \"Señario\" project offers 300 lexical units
specifically designed for deaf children and their families.^21^ This
collaborative effort involved the active participation of 15 LSA
departments from various deaf associations across Argentina, ensuring
community input and relevance.^19^ The \"Señario\" project stands as a
valuable educational tool and a reliable source of contemporary LSA
vocabulary, enriched with cultural context, making it a highly relevant
resource for training AI models, particularly those focused on
translating everyday conversations or educational content.

For more advanced research and the training of sophisticated AI models,
the availability of dedicated LSA databases and corpora is crucial. In
this regard, the LSA-T dataset represents a significant advancement as
the first continuous Argentinian Sign Language dataset specifically
designed for Sign Language Translation tasks.^22^ This substantial
dataset contains an impressive 14,880 sentence-level videos of LSA,
meticulously extracted from the CN Sordos YouTube channel.^22^ Each
video in the LSA-T dataset is accompanied by detailed labels and
keypoint annotations for every signer, providing rich information about
the signs being performed.^22^ The videos are captured in
high-definition (1920x1080) at a frame rate of 30 frames per second,
ensuring high visual quality for analysis.^22^ The entire dataset, in
its compressed form, is approximately 45GB and is available for
download.^22^ To facilitate its use, the creators have also provided a
visualization notebook and a presentation paper detailing the dataset\'s
characteristics and potential applications.^22^ Beyond this
comprehensive dataset, a more focused database containing 64 distinct
LSA signs, with a total of 3200 videos recorded by 10 different
subjects, also exists.^23^ This LSA64 database represents an initial yet
important step towards building a more comprehensive research dataset of
Argentine signs, specifically tailored for sign language recognition and
other machine learning tasks.^23^ Furthermore, researchers at the
National University of La Plata (UNLP) are actively engaged in
developing a system for the automatic translation of LSA into text. As
part of this project, they have constructed a database comprising 3,200
videos showcasing 64 different types of LSA signs.^24^ Additionally, a
more targeted database focusing on the fundamental building blocks of
LSA -- hand configurations -- has been created. This database contains
800 images representing 16 distinct hand configurations used in LSA,
serving as an initial resource for researchers aiming to understand and
model the basic components of Argentine signs.^25^ The existence of
these diverse datasets, particularly the large-scale LSA-T dataset with
its continuous signing and detailed annotations, offers invaluable
resources for training AI models designed for LSA recognition and
translation. The variety in the focus and size of these datasets,
ranging from continuous signing to individual signs and even basic hand
configurations, allows for the development of AI models with specific
and targeted training.

**5. Regional and Social Diversity within LSA**

Similar to the way spoken languages often develop distinct regional
variations and dialects, Argentine Sign Language also exhibits such
diversity across the geographical landscape of Argentina.^4^ These
regional variations in LSA can manifest in different ways, including
subtle differences in grammatical forms and the emergence of unique
local signs that are specific to certain regions.^26^ For example,
individuals from different provinces might use slightly different
handshapes or movements for the same concept, or they might have
entirely distinct signs for particular objects or ideas that are
culturally relevant to their area. Despite the existence of these
regional variations, it is important to note that the fundamental
structural base of LSA remains largely consistent throughout the
country.^29^ This underlying consistency in grammar and syntax ensures
that deaf individuals from different provinces are generally able to
understand each other, facilitating communication across regional
boundaries. Research conducted by M.I. Massone has even identified
regional variations within the manual alphabet used in LSA, indicating
that even the most basic elements of the language can be subject to
regional differences.^30^ This phenomenon of regional variation is not
unique to LSA; it is a common characteristic of natural languages, both
spoken and signed. Just as someone from the north of Argentina might use
different vocabulary or pronunciation than someone from the south when
speaking Spanish, similar differences can arise in the signs used in
different regions of Argentina. Furthermore, the concept of
\"idiolect,\" which refers to the unique and individual way a person
uses language, also applies to LSA.^31^ Each signer, even within the
same region, may have slight personal variations in their signing style,
much like individuals have unique speaking voices and mannerisms. The
presence of these regional and individual variations presents a notable
challenge for AI-driven translation of LSA. An AI model trained
exclusively on one regional dialect of LSA might struggle to accurately
interpret videos featuring signers from other parts of Argentina who use
different signs or grammatical variations. To address this, it would be
beneficial for AI models to be trained on geographically diverse
datasets of LSA or to incorporate mechanisms that can recognize and
adapt to regional variations in signing.

Beyond geographical factors, social elements also influence the usage
and potential variations within LSA. For instance, deaf individuals who
attend specific schools for the deaf may develop and use local sign
variations that are common within their school community but might not
be widely used elsewhere.^4^ These school-based variations can sometimes
persist even after individuals leave the educational setting.
Additionally, the level of formality in a communication situation and
the broader social context can also play a role in the specific signs
and grammatical structures that a signer chooses to use.^31^ In more
formal settings, signers might adhere more closely to what is considered
standard LSA, while in informal settings with friends or family, they
might use more colloquial or regional signs. Understanding how these
social factors can influence language use is important for developing a
comprehensive understanding of LSA. For AI models, this suggests that
the analysis of video content should ideally go beyond just the visual
recognition of individual signs and attempt to incorporate contextual
cues that might provide information about the signer\'s background or
the social setting of the communication. This could potentially help the
AI to better interpret variations in signing that might arise due to
social factors.

**6. The Cultural Significance of LSA and the Argentine Deaf Community**

Argentine Sign Language is not merely a functional tool for
communication; it serves as a fundamental cornerstone of identity and
culture for the Deaf community in Argentina.^2^ For deaf individuals in
Argentina, LSA is far more than just a way to exchange information; it
is a powerful symbol of their ethnic identity and a vital means of
belonging to a unique linguistic and cultural group.^2^ Through LSA,
deaf people in Argentina are able to develop both their individual sense
of self and their collective identity as members of the Deaf
community.^2^ The language facilitates social interaction, allowing for
the formation of strong community bonds and the sharing of experiences,
perspectives, and cultural knowledge that are specific to the Deaf
community.^2^ In essence, the Deaf community in Argentina is recognized
as a linguistic minority, possessing not only their own distinct
language, LSA, but also their own unique cultural norms, values, and
shared beliefs.^2^ Recognizing this deep and intrinsic connection
between LSA and Deaf culture is absolutely essential for any attempt at
respectful and accurate translation of videos featuring LSA. An AI model
that is designed to translate LSA should ideally be trained not only on
the linguistic aspects of the language but also with a comprehensive
understanding of this rich cultural context to avoid potential
misinterpretations or culturally insensitive translations.

Several key aspects of Argentine Deaf culture are particularly relevant
to the use of LSA and its translation. One significant factor is the
role of schools for the deaf in Argentina. Historically and currently,
these schools have served as important centers for the development,
transmission, and preservation of LSA and Argentine Deaf culture.^4^ For
many deaf individuals, especially those born to hearing parents, the
school environment provides the first and often most crucial opportunity
to fully immerse themselves in LSA and connect with other members of the
Deaf community, fostering a sense of shared identity and cultural
belonging. Another important aspect of Argentine Deaf culture is the
community\'s long history of actively advocating for their linguistic
rights and the official recognition of LSA.^4^ This advocacy has been
instrumental in raising awareness about the importance of LSA and the
unique needs of the Deaf community. The Argentine Confederation of the
Deaf (CAS) stands as a central organization in this regard, playing a
vital role in representing the interests of deaf individuals across
Argentina and actively promoting the use and recognition of LSA at both
national and local levels.^9^ Furthermore, there are specific dates that
hold significant cultural meaning for the Argentine Deaf community.
August 29th is celebrated annually as the National Day of Argentine Sign
Language (*Día Nacional de la Lengua de Señas Argentina*), commemorating
a key moment in the language\'s history.^6^ Additionally, September 19th
is observed as the Day of the Deaf (*Día del Sordo*), a day to further
raise awareness about the Deaf community and their contributions to
society.^36^ Understanding this historical and organizational context of
the Argentine Deaf community provides valuable background information
for interpreting language use and appreciating the profound significance
of LSA within this community. The central role of organizations like CAS
underscores the importance of consulting with and involving the Deaf
community in any project that aims to work with or represent their
language, including AI-driven translation initiatives, to ensure that
the resulting technologies are accurate, respectful, and truly meet the
needs of the community.

**7. Navigating Idiomatic Expressions and Linguistic Nuances in LSA**

Like any vibrant and fully developed natural language, Argentine Sign
Language is rich with idiomatic expressions, often referred to as
\"giros lingüísticos\" in Spanish, which carry meanings that extend
beyond the literal interpretations of their individual signs.^37^ These
idiomatic expressions are an integral part of LSA and are essential for
achieving communication that feels natural and contextually appropriate
within the language.^40^ To communicate effectively in LSA, one must
learn not only the individual signs and grammatical rules but also these
unique idiomatic phrases and their specific, often non-literal,
meanings. Examples of such idiomatic expressions in LSA include phrases
like \"Hacelo vos\" (Do it yourself) and \"Lo logré\" (I achieved it or
I succeeded).^38^ These expressions, while composed of individual signs,
convey a complete idea or sentiment that cannot be simply derived by
adding up the dictionary definitions of each sign. A YouTube video
dedicated to teaching \"giros\" in LSA emphasizes that these expressions
often do not have a direct, logical explanation and are often arbitrary,
meaning their meaning is established by convention within the language
community rather than by their visual components alone.^37^ Similarly, a
TikTok video specifically focuses on exploring and explaining various
idiomatic turns of phrase that are common in LSA.^38^ Furthermore, the
Argentine Confederation of the Deaf (CAS) has compiled a \"Señario de
términos y expresiones\" (Signary of terms and expressions), which
likely includes a collection of these idiomatic phrases alongside more
literal vocabulary entries.^19^ The presence of these idiomatic
expressions in LSA presents a considerable challenge for AI-driven
translation that relies on a more literal, sign-by-sign approach. To
accurately translate these expressions, the AI model needs to be trained
to recognize them not as isolated signs but as complete units with
specific, often non-compositional, meanings.

Identifying and accurately translating these non-literal expressions in
LSA poses a significant hurdle. Unlike literal vocabulary where a sign
often has a relatively direct equivalent in a spoken language like
Spanish, idiomatic expressions in LSA frequently do not have a
one-to-one correspondence or a direct equivalent in Spanish.^37^ The
meaning of an idiom is often deeply rooted in the cultural context of
the language and cannot be easily inferred or derived from the
individual signs that constitute the phrase.^37^ For accurate
translation, it is crucial to understand not only the individual signs
but also the underlying cultural context and the intended non-literal
meaning of the entire expression.^37^ This requires a deeper level of
understanding of both LSA and Argentine Deaf culture than simply knowing
the dictionary definitions of the individual signs. For an AI model to
effectively handle these linguistic nuances, it might benefit
significantly from being trained on a substantial number of examples of
these idiomatic expressions used in various contexts, along with their
accurate corresponding translations in Spanish. This type of training
would allow the AI to learn to recognize these expressions as distinct
units of meaning, rather than attempting to translate them sign by sign,
which would likely result in nonsensical or inaccurate translations.

**8. The Complexities of LSA Translation and Interpretation**

Translating between Argentine Sign Language and Spanish presents a
complex set of challenges due to the fundamental differences in their
linguistic structures. LSA operates as a visual-gestural language with a
Subject-Object-Verb (SOV) word order, while Spanish is an auditory-vocal
language with a Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) order.^4^ This basic
difference in sentence structure alone requires more than a simple
substitution of words for signs. Additionally, LSA relies heavily on
non-manual markers, such as facial expressions and body movements, to
convey grammatical information and nuance, features that have different
functions and levels of importance in Spanish.^41^ Furthermore, LSA does
not utilize articles like \"el,\" \"la,\" or \"un,\" which are common in
Spanish, and it expresses concepts like gender and number in ways that
differ from Spanish grammatical conventions.^41^ A critical aspect of
working with LSA is the ability to distinguish between genuine
linguistic signs, which have established meanings and grammatical roles
within the language, and mere gestures, which might be idiosyncratic or
lack linguistic significance.^41^ The same LSA sign can sometimes have
multiple possible interpretations when translated into Spanish,
depending on the context, and conversely, a single Spanish word might
require different signs in LSA depending on the specific meaning being
conveyed.^41^ The body itself plays a much more central role in LSA than
in spoken Spanish, with posture, head tilts, and eye gaze all
contributing to the overall meaning of an utterance.^41^ Even seemingly
straightforward grammatical concepts can present translation
difficulties. For example, the future perfect tense, which exists in
both Spanish and LSA, is expressed in LSA through a combination of
manual signs and specific non-manual markers, making it a complex
feature to accurately identify and translate.^41^ The very structure of
LSA is deeply intertwined with a visual culture, influencing how
information is organized and presented.^42^ These significant linguistic
differences underscore that LSA is not simply a signed version of
Spanish but an independent language with its own unique rules and
conventions. Therefore, any approach to translation, whether human or
AI-driven, must move beyond a direct word-for-sign substitution and
strive to understand and replicate the underlying grammatical and
semantic principles of LSA.

Effective interpretation between LSA and Spanish requires a deep
understanding of not only the linguistic systems of both languages but
also the distinct cultural contexts in which they are used.^43^
Qualified interpreters act as crucial bridges, facilitating
communication between individuals who come from these different
linguistic and cultural backgrounds.^44^ The process of interpretation
involves more than just converting words or signs; it requires an
understanding of the nuances, the implicit meanings, and the cultural
references that are embedded within each language. This is particularly
evident when it comes to interpreting songs and artistic presentations.
These forms of expression often present unique challenges because they
need to be reformulated not just linguistically but also culturally into
a visual and spatial language by Deaf individuals who possess a deep
understanding of Deaf culture.^43^ This process demands a significant
amount of preparation and often requires collaboration within a team to
ensure that the cultural equivalence of the original work is maintained
in the LSA interpretation. The linguistic and cultural barriers that
exist between LSA and Spanish highlight the need for interpreters who
are not only fluent in both languages but also deeply knowledgeable
about the cultural norms and communication styles of both the hearing
and Deaf communities.

Given these complexities, the role of qualified LSA interpreters is of
paramount importance in ensuring effective communication between deaf
and hearing individuals in Argentina.^9^ These professionals possess a
high level of expertise in both LSA and Spanish, as well as a nuanced
understanding of the cultural contexts of both the Deaf and hearing
communities.^44^ They are skilled at navigating the linguistic
differences, interpreting non-manual markers, and conveying the intended
meaning accurately and culturally sensitively. The Argentine
Confederation of the Deaf (CAS) actively advocates for the
professionalization of LSA teaching and interpretation, emphasizing the
crucial role of deaf individuals in these processes and highlighting the
need for standards and qualifications within the field.^9^ While
AI-driven translation tools hold promise for assisting communication in
certain situations, the expertise and cultural understanding that
qualified human interpreters bring to the task remain indispensable,
especially for complex, nuanced, or culturally sensitive communication
scenarios. Therefore, while exploring AI-driven solutions for LSA
translation, it is important to recognize that these technologies should
aim to complement, rather than replace, the critical role of qualified
LSA interpreters in facilitating full and meaningful communication
access for the Deaf community.

**9. Current Research and Technological Advancements in LSA**

The field of Argentine Sign Language is a subject of ongoing and active
research, with numerous linguistic projects continually expanding our
understanding of its structure, usage, and cultural significance. The
National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), known as
*Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas*, has
established a long-standing and fruitful collaboration spanning over 25
years with the Argentine Confederation of the Deaf (CAS) to conduct
in-depth linguistic research on LSA.^4^ This research primarily focuses
on meticulously describing the intricate grammar of LSA and addressing
various sociolinguistic issues that are pertinent to the Deaf community
within Argentina.^4^ Dr. Rocío Martínez, a dedicated researcher at
CONICET, has made significant contributions to the field of LSA
research. Her work includes the development of the \"Señario\" project,
a valuable bilingual resource for LSA education, as well as the creation
of comprehensive guidelines for the teaching, learning, and evaluation
of LSA.^51^ The Institute of Linguistics at the prestigious University
of Buenos Aires (UBA) also actively engages in collaborative research on
the grammar of LSA, working directly with members of the Deaf community
to ensure that the research is informed by the lived experiences and
linguistic expertise of LSA users themselves.^52^ The depth and breadth
of academic inquiry into LSA are further evidenced by a substantial body
of academic articles and doctoral theses that delve into various aspects
of LSA linguistics. These scholarly works explore topics ranging from
the detailed analysis of LSA grammar and its unique lexicon to
investigations of its syntactic structures and the complexities of its
translation.^35^ The continuous and evolving nature of this linguistic
research underscores the fact that our understanding of LSA is
constantly growing, making it essential for anyone working with the
language, particularly in the context of technological applications, to
stay informed about the latest findings.

In parallel with the ongoing linguistic research, there are several
promising initiatives focused on leveraging the power of Artificial
Intelligence to develop systems for the automatic translation of LSA.
Researchers at the National University of La Plata (UNLP) are actively
engaged in a project that aims to create an AI-powered system capable of
translating LSA into written text in real-time.^24^ This ambitious
project utilizes video databases of LSA signs to train its AI
algorithms, striving to bridge the communication gap between LSA users
and those who do not understand the language. Another noteworthy
initiative is underway at the University of Quilmes, where researchers
are developing a mobile application that will offer real-time
translation between LSA and spoken Spanish, again relying on the
capabilities of Artificial Intelligence.^70^ This type of mobile
application has the potential to significantly improve communication
accessibility for deaf individuals in everyday situations. Furthermore,
a web-based system is being developed with the goal of interpreting LSA
signs, whether they are performed live via webcam or presented in
pre-recorded videos.^64^ This project explores the use of various AI
models, including optimized decision trees and recurrent neural
networks, to achieve accurate interpretation and translation of LSA.
Researchers at the National University of Córdoba are also contributing
to this field by working on an automatic LSA interpreter that
specifically aims to capture not only the literal meaning of signs but
also the emotional and expressive nuances that are often conveyed
through sign language.^72^ The development of the LSA-T dataset, as
mentioned earlier, was itself a significant technological advancement,
providing a large-scale resource specifically for training and
evaluating AI models for Sign Language Translation tasks.^22^ Beyond
software-based solutions, some researchers are exploring the use of
innovative hardware like specialized gloves or glasses equipped with AI
capabilities to translate sign language into spoken or written language
in real-time.^74^ While these technological advancements hold
considerable promise for assisting communication, it is important to
acknowledge that the inherent complexity of LSA and the subtle nuances
of sign language in general pose significant challenges that current AI
technologies are still working to fully overcome.

The processing and analysis of Argentine Sign Language using
technological tools rely on a combination of established linguistic
methodologies and cutting-edge technologies. One of the foundational
tools for linguists studying LSA is the Glosa system, a key method for
the linguistic notation and analysis of sign languages.^4^ Glosa
provides a standardized way to represent LSA signs in written form,
which is essential for research and the development of linguistic
resources. Video recording plays an indispensable role in documenting
and studying LSA.^1^ High-quality video recordings are crucial for
capturing the intricate details of manual signs, non-manual markers, and
the overall flow of signed communication. As mentioned earlier,
specialized datasets like LSA-T provide valuable collections of video
data, often accompanied by annotations, which are essential for training
and evaluating AI models designed for LSA recognition and
translation.^22^ Some research projects are also exploring the use of
motion capture technology, such as the Microsoft Kinect sensor, to track
and analyze the movements of signers\' hands and bodies, aiming to
extract features that can be used for automatic sign recognition.^79^
These various tools and technologies, when used in conjunction with a
deep understanding of the linguistic principles of LSA, are paving the
way for advancements in the automatic processing and translation of
Argentine Sign Language. Researchers and developers working in this
field should consider leveraging these existing tools and established
methodologies to further their efforts in creating accurate and
effective AI-driven solutions for LSA translation.

**10. Linguistic Notation and Analysis: Understanding Glosa for LSA**

The Glosa system is a fundamental tool employed in the field of sign
language linguistics, including the study of Argentine Sign Language. It
serves as a standardized method for representing signs in a written
format, primarily utilizing capitalized words from a spoken language, in
this case Spanish, to approximate the meaning or concept of each
sign.^76^ The primary purpose of Glosa is to facilitate the description
and analysis of the grammatical structure of a sign language in a way
that is independent of the grammatical influences of the spoken language
it is being compared against, such as Spanish in the case of LSA.^76^ By
providing a written representation, Glosa allows linguists to
systematically examine the syntax, morphology, and other linguistic
features of LSA.

The Glosa system employs a set of specific conventions to accurately
represent various aspects of LSA. For instance, when a single sign in
LSA corresponds to a compound concept that requires two or more words in
Spanish to express, this is often indicated in Glosa by hyphenating the
Spanish words (e.g., \"POR-EJEMPLO\" for the sign meaning \"for
example\").^76^ If a signer uses fingerspelling to spell out a word
(often for proper nouns or concepts lacking a specific sign), this is
represented in Glosa by writing each letter of the Spanish word
separated by hyphens (e.g., \"C-A-S-A\" for the letters C-A-S-A).^76^
The location where a sign is performed in the signing space can also be
indicated using subscripts or other notations (e.g., \"\_a_GLOSA_b\_\"
to show a sign moving from location \'a\' to location \'b\').^76^
Crucially, non-manual markers, such as facial expressions (e.g., raised
eyebrows for questions, headshakes for negation) and body movements,
which play a vital role in LSA grammar, are also represented in Glosa,
typically by placing a line above the corresponding manual signs and
indicating the specific non-manual feature.^76^ Understanding the Glosa
system is therefore essential for anyone involved in the linguistic
analysis of LSA. It provides a standardized and systematic way to
represent and study the language\'s intricate structure, enabling
researchers to delve into its grammatical rules, identify patterns, and
ultimately gain a deeper understanding of how LSA functions as a
language. For projects involving AI-driven translation, Glosa could
potentially serve as a valuable intermediate representation, allowing
the AI model to first process the video and generate a Glosa
transcription, which could then be translated into Spanish or another
target language, or vice versa. This intermediate step might help in
capturing the structural nuances of LSA more effectively than a direct
sign-to-word translation approach.

**11. Conclusion and Recommendations for Gemini Pro 2.5 Integration**

Argentine Sign Language stands as a vibrant and complex visual-gestural
language with a rich history and cultural significance for the Deaf
community in Argentina. Its linguistic features, including its
Subject-Object-Verb word order, the crucial role of non-manual markers,
the absence of articles, the presence of regional variations and
idiomatic expressions, and its fundamental distinction from Spanish, all
contribute to its unique character and present specific challenges for
accurate translation.

To effectively integrate LSA data into the Gemini Pro 2.5 AI model and
improve the accuracy of video translations, the following
recommendations are provided:

- **Training Data:** The training data used to develop the AI model
  > should be as comprehensive and diverse as possible. This includes
  > incorporating large datasets of LSA videos, such as the LSA-T
  > dataset and the databases developed by UNCuyo and UNLP, ensuring
  > these videos are paired with accurate transcriptions in both Glosa
  > and Spanish.^14^ Specific examples illustrating LSA grammar,
  > including its unique word order, the use of non-manual markers for
  > grammatical functions like negation and interrogation, and the ways
  > in which gender and number are expressed, should be included in the
  > training data.^4^ A comprehensive lexicon of LSA signs and their
  > Spanish equivalents, potentially leveraging resources like the
  > UNCuyo Digital Dictionary and the CAS \"Señario\" project, should be
  > utilized, with careful consideration given to documenting and
  > incorporating regional variations in signs where possible.^4^
  > Furthermore, the training data should include specific examples of
  > idiomatic expressions (\"giros lingüísticos\") in LSA, along with
  > their contextual meanings in Spanish, to enable the AI to recognize
  > and accurately translate these non-literal phrases.^37^ Finally,
  > incorporating data that reflects the cultural context in which LSA
  > is used within the Argentine Deaf community can help the AI model to
  > better understand nuances and interpret signs and expressions more
  > accurately.^2^

- **AI Model Architecture:** The architecture of the AI model should be
  > carefully designed to account for the unique linguistic features of
  > LSA. This includes considering the Subject-Object-Verb word order
  > and developing mechanisms to rearrange Spanish sentences into the
  > correct LSA order during translation. Given the crucial role of
  > non-manual markers in LSA, the model should incorporate advanced
  > video analysis capabilities that can effectively detect and
  > interpret facial expressions and body movements, recognizing them
  > not just as visual features but as integral components of the
  > language\'s grammar and meaning.^2^ The model should also be trained
  > to understand the absence of articles in LSA and the alternative
  > ways in which gender and number are indicated.^4^ To address the
  > challenge of regional variations, the AI could potentially be
  > trained on geographically diverse datasets if available, or a
  > dialect recognition component might be integrated into the model to
  > identify and adapt to regional differences in signing.^4^ Specific
  > training on idiomatic expressions is also essential, enabling the AI
  > to recognize these phrases as holistic units with non-literal
  > meanings rather than attempting to translate them sign by sign.^37^

- **Post-processing and Validation:** After the AI model generates LSA
  > transcriptions, it is crucial to involve native LSA users in a
  > thorough validation process. Their expert feedback will be
  > invaluable in ensuring the accuracy, fluency, and cultural
  > appropriateness of the AI-generated translations.^9^ Furthermore,
  > the evaluation metrics used to assess the AI\'s performance should
  > go beyond simple word-level accuracy. They should aim to measure the
  > grammatical correctness of the LSA output, its fluency, and its
  > overall comprehensibility from the perspective of a native LSA user.
  > This might involve developing metrics that specifically assess the
  > correct use of word order, non-manual markers, and idiomatic
  > expressions.

By carefully considering these recommendations, the integration of
comprehensive and accurate LSA data into the Gemini Pro 2.5 AI model can
be significantly enhanced, leading to more precise and meaningful video
translations that effectively support communication with the Argentine
Deaf community.

**Table 1: Comparison of LSA and Spanish Grammatical Features**

| **Feature**               | **LSA Characteristic**                               | **Spanish Characteristic**                             | **Snippet ID(s)** |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| Word Order                | Subject-Object-Verb (SOV)                            | Subject-Verb-Object (SVO)                              | ^4^               |
| Articles                  | Absent                                               | Present (el, la, los, las, un, una, unos, unas)        | ^4^               |
| Gender Marking            | Often indicated by separate signs (e.g., man, woman) | Grammatical gender assigned to nouns and articles      | ^13^              |
| Number Marking            | Often indicated by separate signs (e.g., many)       | Plural forms of nouns and articles                     | ^13^              |
| Verbs \"Ser\" & \"Estar\" | Often implied or indicated by tense/context          | Distinct verbs for different states of being           | ^12^              |
| Subject Pronouns          | Often implicit                                       | Typically explicit                                     | ^4^               |
| Interrogation             | Marker (often non-manual) at the end of sentence     | Inverted word order or question words at the beginning | ^4^               |

**Table 2: Examples of Idiomatic Expressions (\"Giros Lingüísticos\") in
LSA**

| **LSA Expression (Descriptive English)** | **Spanish Equivalent** | **Snippet ID(s)** |
|------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| Do it yourself                           | Hacelo vos             | ^38^              |
| I achieved it/I succeeded                | Lo logré               | ^38^              |

**Table 3: Overview of Available LSA Datasets**

| **Dataset Name** | **Source/Creator**          | **Number of Videos/Signs** | **Annotations**                 | **Download Link (if available)**                                                           | **Snippet ID(s)** |
|------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| LSA-T            | CN Sordos (YouTube channel) | 14,880 sentences           | Labels and keypoint annotations | [[https://app.seni.ar/datasets/lsat.7z]{.underline}](https://app.seni.ar/datasets/lsat.7z) | ^22^              |
| LSA64            | Unknown                     | 3,200 videos/64 signs      | None                            | Not available in snippets                                                                  | ^23^              |
| UNLP Database    | UNLP Researchers            | 3,200 videos/64 signs      | None                            | Not available in snippets                                                                  | ^24^              |
| Hand Config. DB  | Unknown                     | 800 images/16 configs      | None                            | Not available in snippets                                                                  | ^25^              |

#### Obras citadas

1.  Una aproximación interaccional para el análisis de la Lengua de
    > Señas Argentina, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cultura-sorda.org/una-aproximacion-interaccional-para-el-analisis-lsa/]{.underline}](https://cultura-sorda.org/una-aproximacion-interaccional-para-el-analisis-lsa/)

2.  La Lengua de Señas Argentina -- LSA - INALSA, fecha de acceso: mayo
    > 15, 2025,
    > [[https://inalsa.cas.org.ar/nuestra-lsa/lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa/]{.underline}](https://inalsa.cas.org.ar/nuestra-lsa/lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa/)

3.  ¿SABÉS QUÉ ES LA LENGUA DE SEÑAS ARGENTINA? - YouTube, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CoinCBXrA_I]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CoinCBXrA_I)

4.  Lengua de señas argentina - Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lengua_de_se%C3%B1as_argentina]{.underline}](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lengua_de_se%C3%B1as_argentina)

5.  Lengua de Señas - investigacion-palacio-ceci - Webnode, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://investigacion-palacio-ceci.webnode.es/lengua-de-senas2/]{.underline}](https://investigacion-palacio-ceci.webnode.es/lengua-de-senas2/)

6.  Día de la Lengua de Señas Argentina: por qué se celebra y cuál es su
    > origen - Infocielo, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://infocielo.com/sociedad/dia-la-lengua-senas-argentina-que-se-celebra-y-cual-es-su-origen-n770440]{.underline}](https://infocielo.com/sociedad/dia-la-lengua-senas-argentina-que-se-celebra-y-cual-es-su-origen-n770440)

7.  29 de agosto: Día Nacional de la Lengua de Señas Argentina (LSA),
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/29-de-agosto-dia-nacional-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa]{.underline}](https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/29-de-agosto-dia-nacional-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa)

8.  Ley simple: Lengua de Señas Argentina \| Argentina.gob.ar, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.argentina.gob.ar/justicia/derechofacil/leysimple/discapacidad/lengua-de-senas-argentina]{.underline}](https://www.argentina.gob.ar/justicia/derechofacil/leysimple/discapacidad/lengua-de-senas-argentina)

9.  Enseñanza de la Lengua de Señas Argentina -- LSA -- CAS, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cas.org.ar/ensenanza-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa/]{.underline}](https://cas.org.ar/ensenanza-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa/)

10. resumen de la historia de la lengua de señas argentina -
    > Nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos.webnode.page/resumen-de-la-historia-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina/]{.underline}](https://nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos.webnode.page/resumen-de-la-historia-de-la-lengua-de-senas-argentina/)

11. Confederación Argentina de Sordos: CAS, fecha de acceso: mayo 15,
    > 2025, [[https://cas.org.ar/]{.underline}](https://cas.org.ar/)

12. Parametros Gramaticales Lsa \| PDF \| Artes del lenguaje y
    > disciplina - Scribd, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://es.scribd.com/presentation/471804672/PARAMETROS-GRAMATICALES-LSA]{.underline}](https://es.scribd.com/presentation/471804672/PARAMETROS-GRAMATICALES-LSA)

13. Gramática de Lengua de Señas Argentina \| PDF \| Arte - Scribd,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://es.scribd.com/document/673917118/Gramatica-de-Lengua-de-Senas-Argentina]{.underline}](https://es.scribd.com/document/673917118/Gramatica-de-Lengua-de-Senas-Argentina)

14. Más de cuatro mil videos del primer Diccionario Digital de Lengua
    > \..., fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://educacion.uncuyo.edu.ar/mas-de-cuatro-mil-videos-del-primer-diccionario-digital-de-lengua-de-senas-argentina-estan-disponibles-on-line]{.underline}](https://educacion.uncuyo.edu.ar/mas-de-cuatro-mil-videos-del-primer-diccionario-digital-de-lengua-de-senas-argentina-estan-disponibles-on-line)

15. La Universidad Nacional de Cuyo creó un diccionario digital de LSA -
    > Educ.ar, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.educ.ar/noticias/200672/la-universidad-nacional-de-cuyo-creoacute-un-diccionario-digital-de-lsa]{.underline}](https://www.educ.ar/noticias/200672/la-universidad-nacional-de-cuyo-creoacute-un-diccionario-digital-de-lsa)

16. Diccionario Digital de Lengua de Señas, Facultad de Educación
    > UNCUYO - YouTube, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XLJjspxkXoE]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XLJjspxkXoE)

17. Diccionario Digital LSA, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.diccionariodigitallsa.com/]{.underline}](https://www.diccionariodigitallsa.com/)

18. Compartimos el Diccionario de Lengua de Señas Argentina - SOY
    > BIBLIOTECARIO, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://soybibliotecario.blogspot.com/2020/08/diccionario-lengua-senas-argentina.html]{.underline}](https://soybibliotecario.blogspot.com/2020/08/diccionario-lengua-senas-argentina.html)

19. Señario de términos y expresiones en Lengua de Señas Argentina Vol.
    > 1, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cas.org.ar/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina/]{.underline}](https://cas.org.ar/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina/)

20. Señario de términos y expresiones en Lengua de Señas Argentina --
    > Descarga -- CAS, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cas.org.ar/2019/05/24/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-descarga/]{.underline}](https://cas.org.ar/2019/05/24/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-descarga/)

21. Señario de términos y expresiones en Lengua de Señas Argentina Vol.
    > 2, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cas.org.ar/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-vol-2/]{.underline}](https://cas.org.ar/senario-de-terminos-y-expresiones-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-vol-2/)

22. LSA-T Dataset \| Papers With Code, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/lsa-t]{.underline}](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/lsa-t)

23. Intérprete Inteligente, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://aprendizajeinteligente.fcefyn.unc.edu.ar/wp-content/blogs.dir/57/files/sites/57/2024/03/Problemas-Emergentes_Interprete-Inteligente_Lenguaje-de-senas.pdf]{.underline}](http://aprendizajeinteligente.fcefyn.unc.edu.ar/wp-content/blogs.dir/57/files/sites/57/2024/03/Problemas-Emergentes_Interprete-Inteligente_Lenguaje-de-senas.pdf)

24. Desarrollan un sistema para traducir la lengua de Señas - Facultad
    > de Informática UNLP, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.info.unlp.edu.ar/desarrollan-un-sistema-para-traducir-el-lenguaje-de-senas/]{.underline}](https://www.info.unlp.edu.ar/desarrollan-un-sistema-para-traducir-el-lenguaje-de-senas/)

25. Clasificación de configuraciones de manos del Lenguaje de Señas
    > Argentino con ProbSOM, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/SEDICI_5f50fc0c7519df4d9465932a3649c9f9]{.underline}](https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/SEDICI_5f50fc0c7519df4d9465932a3649c9f9)

26. MITOS DE LSA - Nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos, fecha de acceso: mayo
    > 15, 2025,
    > [[https://nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos.webnode.page/mitos-de-lsa/]{.underline}](https://nuestro-idioma-en-las-manos.webnode.page/mitos-de-lsa/)

27. Apunte Lengua de Señas Argentina \| PDF - Scribd, fecha de acceso:
    > mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://es.scribd.com/document/462143276/Apunte-Lengua-de-Senas-Argentina]{.underline}](https://es.scribd.com/document/462143276/Apunte-Lengua-de-Senas-Argentina)

28. Lengua de señas argentina.pptx congreso \| PPT - SlideShare, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://es.slideshare.net/slideshow/lengua-de-seas-argentinapptx-congreso/20753777]{.underline}](https://es.slideshare.net/slideshow/lengua-de-seas-argentinapptx-congreso/20753777)

29. Lengua de Señas Argentina - Todo lo que tienes que saber -
    > Incluyeme.com, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.incluyeme.com/lengua-de-senas-argentina/]{.underline}](https://www.incluyeme.com/lengua-de-senas-argentina/)

30. Curso-de-lengua-de-señas.pdf - H. LEGISLATURA DE MENDOZA, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://escuela.legislaturamendoza.gov.ar/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Curso-de-lengua-de-se%C3%B1as.pdf]{.underline}](https://escuela.legislaturamendoza.gov.ar/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Curso-de-lengua-de-se%C3%B1as.pdf)

31. VARIACIONES DE LA LENGUA EXPLICADAS CON EJEMPLOS \..., fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJDriVl7OIE&pp=0gcJCdgAo7VqN5tD]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJDriVl7OIE&pp=0gcJCdgAo7VqN5tD)

32. Comunidad Sorda - Fundación Sordos Comahue, fecha de acceso: mayo
    > 15, 2025,
    > [[https://fundacionsordoscomahue.com/comunidad-sorda-argentina/]{.underline}](https://fundacionsordoscomahue.com/comunidad-sorda-argentina/)

33. La Lengua de Señas, derecho innegable - Argentina.gob.ar, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.argentina.gob.ar/andis/la-lengua-de-senas-derecho-innegable]{.underline}](https://www.argentina.gob.ar/andis/la-lengua-de-senas-derecho-innegable)

34. LENGUA DE SEÑAS ARGENTINA - YouTube, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dExOc3B1JY0&pp=0gcJCdgAo7VqN5tD]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dExOc3B1JY0&pp=0gcJCdgAo7VqN5tD)

35. Descripción: Gramática y léxico de la lengua de señas Argentina,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/Filo_5564590f2748098d43508732ba9ce446]{.underline}](https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/Filo_5564590f2748098d43508732ba9ce446)

36. ASAM, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.asamutual.org.ar/]{.underline}](https://www.asamutual.org.ar/)

37. Taller de Lengua de señas argentina. Giros Idiomaticos en Lengua
    > \..., fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oq9bQakSh_c]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oq9bQakSh_c)

38. Giros idiomáticos en LSA \| TikTok, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.tiktok.com/@rodriivargas809/video/7335107211108044037]{.underline}](https://www.tiktok.com/@rodriivargas809/video/7335107211108044037)

39. Giros Idiomáticos en Lengua de Señas Argentina - TikTok, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.tiktok.com/@notisor/video/7272183828167347461]{.underline}](https://www.tiktok.com/@notisor/video/7272183828167347461)

40. Taller Giros Lingüísticos en Lengua de Señas Argentina, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://xn\--lenguadeseas-jhb.com.ar/talleres/giros-linguisticos/]{.underline}](https://xn--lenguadeseas-jhb.com.ar/talleres/giros-linguisticos/)

41. Lenguas de señas: "cada comunidad desarrolló la propia por \...,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.conicet.gov.ar/lenguas-de-senas-cada-comunidad-desarrollo-la-propia-por-necesidad/]{.underline}](https://www.conicet.gov.ar/lenguas-de-senas-cada-comunidad-desarrollo-la-propia-por-necesidad/)

42. Conversatorio: Lengua de Señas Argentina: comunidad sorda, cultura y
    > lengua - YouTube, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JT9EEKCKNbc]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JT9EEKCKNbc)

43. BUENAS PRÁCTICAS PARA LA INTERPRETACIÓN EN LENGUA DE SEÑAS ARGENTINA
    > EN MEDIOS DE COMUNICACIÓN AUDIOVISUAL, fecha de acceso: mayo 15,
    > 2025,
    > [[https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/buenas_practicas_en_la_interpretaciona_de_lengua_de_senas.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/buenas_practicas_en_la_interpretaciona_de_lengua_de_senas.pdf)

44. Ética y procedimiento profesional para Intérpretes de Lengua de
    > Señas - Biblioteca Digital UNCUYO, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://bdigital.uncu.edu.ar/objetos_digitales/4633/eticaburad.pdf]{.underline}](https://bdigital.uncu.edu.ar/objetos_digitales/4633/eticaburad.pdf)

45. La evolución de la interpretación en lengua de señas: un camino a la
    > accesibilidad y al derecho a la diversidad lingüística - Revistas
    > de la Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, fecha de acceso: mayo 15,
    > 2025,
    > [[https://revistas.unc.edu.ar/index.php/ReCIT/article/download/37124/38984/144756]{.underline}](https://revistas.unc.edu.ar/index.php/ReCIT/article/download/37124/38984/144756)

46. http://www.cultura-sorda.eu La interpretación del par lengua de
    > señas -- cultura sorda lengua hablada -- cultura oyente., fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cultura-sorda.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Burad_Viviana_Interpretacion_par_LSCS_LHCO_Brevisima_aproximacion_conceptualizaciones_generales_2009.pdf]{.underline}](https://cultura-sorda.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Burad_Viviana_Interpretacion_par_LSCS_LHCO_Brevisima_aproximacion_conceptualizaciones_generales_2009.pdf)

47. Buenas prácticas para la interpretación en Lengua de Señas Argentina
    > en medios de comunicación audiovisual - Cultura Sorda, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cultura-sorda.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Buenas-Practicas-lengua-de-senas.pdf]{.underline}](https://cultura-sorda.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Buenas-Practicas-lengua-de-senas.pdf)

48. Interpretación en lengua de señas argentina (LSA) - Educ.ar, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.educ.ar/recursos/158988/interpretacion-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa]{.underline}](https://www.educ.ar/recursos/158988/interpretacion-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-lsa)

49. aati.org.ar, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://aati.org.ar/content/3-novedades/12-tavacc/5-informe-interpretacion-lsa/encuesta-ilsa-e-educativos-y-cv-19-1.pdf]{.underline}](https://aati.org.ar/content/3-novedades/12-tavacc/5-informe-interpretacion-lsa/encuesta-ilsa-e-educativos-y-cv-19-1.pdf)

50. El vínculo entre Intérpretes en Lengua de Señas Argentina -- Español
    > (LSA -- E) y Comunidad Sorda desde la perspectiva de los
    > estudiantes a partir de sus experiencias en las Prácticas
    > Profesionalizantes - Ministerio de Educación de Chaco, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://educacion.chaco.gob.ar/2022/06/02/el-vinculo-entre-interpretes-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-espanol-lsa-e-y-comunidad-sorda-desde-la-perspectiva-de-los-estudiantes-a-partir-de-sus-experiencias-en-las-practicas-pr/]{.underline}](https://educacion.chaco.gob.ar/2022/06/02/el-vinculo-entre-interpretes-en-lengua-de-senas-argentina-espanol-lsa-e-y-comunidad-sorda-desde-la-perspectiva-de-los-estudiantes-a-partir-de-sus-experiencias-en-las-practicas-pr/)

51. Aportes del CONICET a la Ley de Lengua de Señas Argentina \...,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.conicet.gov.ar/aportes-del-conicet-a-la-ley-de-lengua-de-senas-argentina/]{.underline}](https://www.conicet.gov.ar/aportes-del-conicet-a-la-ley-de-lengua-de-senas-argentina/)

52. Estudios de la gramática de la Lengua de Señas Argentina en forma
    > colaborativa con miembros de la comunidad sorda y en respuesta a
    > sus demandas. Una investigación etnográfica y lingüística desde el
    > Enfoque Cognitivo Prototípico., fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://il.institutos.filo.uba.ar/proyecto/estudios-de-la-gram%C3%A1tica-de-la-lengua-de-se%C3%B1as-argentina-en-forma-colaborativa-con-miembros]{.underline}](https://il.institutos.filo.uba.ar/proyecto/estudios-de-la-gram%C3%A1tica-de-la-lengua-de-se%C3%B1as-argentina-en-forma-colaborativa-con-miembros)

53. La lingüística y las lenguas de señas : un abordaje epistemológico,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/RDUUNC_422bb1fdb5f1232fab76cbe1b3a3a6c9]{.underline}](https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/RDUUNC_422bb1fdb5f1232fab76cbe1b3a3a6c9)

54. Análisis de la motivación en la formación de las señas personales de
    > la Lengua de Señas Argentina (LSA) \| Signo y seña - Revistas
    > científicas de Filo, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://revistascientificas.filo.uba.ar/index.php/sys/article/view/10164]{.underline}](http://revistascientificas.filo.uba.ar/index.php/sys/article/view/10164)

55. Hacia una traducción de la lengua de señas argentina - Revistas
    > científicas de Filo, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://revistascientificas.filo.uba.ar/index.php/sys/article/view/14493]{.underline}](http://revistascientificas.filo.uba.ar/index.php/sys/article/view/14493)

56. LAS LENGUAS DE SIGNOS: SU ESTUDIO CIENTÍFICO Y RECONOCIMIENTO
    > LEGAL - Dialnet, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/4200049.pdf]{.underline}](https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/4200049.pdf)

57. Lenguas de señas : estudios de lingüística teórica y aplicada - RDI
    > Principal, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://rdi.uncoma.edu.ar/handle/uncomaid/1570]{.underline}](http://rdi.uncoma.edu.ar/handle/uncomaid/1570)

58. Introducción al dossier \"Estudios gramaticales sobre lenguas de
    > señas de América Latina y el Caribe. Parte I\" \| Quintú Quimün.
    > Revista de lingüística, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://revele.uncoma.edu.ar/index.php/lingustica/article/view/4403]{.underline}](https://revele.uncoma.edu.ar/index.php/lingustica/article/view/4403)

59. Reconsideración, desde un Enfoque Cognitivo-Prototípico, del
    > adjetivo como clase de palabras en la Lengua de Señas Argentina
    > (LSA) - Universidad de Buenos Aires, fecha de acceso: mayo 15,
    > 2025,
    > [[http://repositorio.filo.uba.ar/handle/filodigital/6141]{.underline}](http://repositorio.filo.uba.ar/handle/filodigital/6141)

60. Problemática de la estandarización en las lenguas de señas del Río
    > de la Plata - Cultura Sorda, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cultura-sorda.org/problematica-de-la-estandarizacion-en-las-lenguas-de-senas-del-rio-de-la-plata/]{.underline}](https://cultura-sorda.org/problematica-de-la-estandarizacion-en-las-lenguas-de-senas-del-rio-de-la-plata/)

61. El aprendizaje del lenguaje de señas argentinas en niños sordos del
    > primer ciclo de E.G.B., fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/UNMdPFP_8bda83800c3ef2aefc8c836487cfb2fa]{.underline}](https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/UNMdPFP_8bda83800c3ef2aefc8c836487cfb2fa)

62. Gramática y léxico de la lengua de señas Argentina - Dialnet, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/tesis?codigo=365683]{.underline}](https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/tesis?codigo=365683)

63. LENGUA DE SEÑAS ARGENTINA (LSA) Y ESPAÑOL EN LA ALFABETIZACIÓN DE
    > ALUMNOS SORDOS. APORTES PARA LA PRÁCTICA EDUCATIVA \| Request
    > PDF - ResearchGate, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331254403_LENGUA_DE_SENAS_ARGENTINA_LSA_Y_ESPANOL_EN_LA_ALFABETIZACION_DE_ALUMNOS_SORDOS_APORTES_PARA_LA_PRACTICA_EDUCATIVA]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331254403_LENGUA_DE_SENAS_ARGENTINA_LSA_Y_ESPANOL_EN_LA_ALFABETIZACION_DE_ALUMNOS_SORDOS_APORTES_PARA_LA_PRACTICA_EDUCATIVA)

64. Desarrollo de un Sistema Web intérprete de la Lengua de Señas \...,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://huru.unsj.edu.ar/handle/123456789/321]{.underline}](http://huru.unsj.edu.ar/handle/123456789/321)

65. Hacia una traducción a la lengua de señas argentina - Dialnet, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/9783141.pdf]{.underline}](https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/9783141.pdf)

66. Hacia una traducción de la lengua de señas argentina - ResearchGate,
    > fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384620096_Hacia_una_traduccion_de_la_lengua_de_senas_argentina]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384620096_Hacia_una_traduccion_de_la_lengua_de_senas_argentina)

67. Aproximación al análisis de la interpretación de Lengua de Señas
    > Argentina de términos de economía en el discurso - Dialnet, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/9783143.pdf]{.underline}](https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/9783143.pdf)

68. Descripción: Lenguas de señas : estudios de lingüística teórica y
    > aplicada - Sistema Nacional de Repositorios Digitales, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/RDIUNCO_999c3500f6c5f0f7afa48b77083340f4]{.underline}](https://repositoriosdigitales.mincyt.gob.ar/vufind/Record/RDIUNCO_999c3500f6c5f0f7afa48b77083340f4)

69. Sistema para traducir a texto el lenguaje de señas, fecha de acceso:
    > mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://argentinainvestiga.edu.ar/noticia.php?titulo=sistema_para_traducir_a_texto_el_lenguaje_de_seas&id=2810]{.underline}](https://argentinainvestiga.edu.ar/noticia.php?titulo=sistema_para_traducir_a_texto_el_lenguaje_de_seas&id=2810)

70. La Inteligencia artificial aplicada a la Lengua de Señas
    > Argentinas - UNQ, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.unq.edu.ar/noticias/la-inteligencia-artificial-aplicada-a-la-lengua-de-senas-argentinas/]{.underline}](https://www.unq.edu.ar/noticias/la-inteligencia-artificial-aplicada-a-la-lengua-de-senas-argentinas/)

71. fecha de acceso: diciembre 31, 1969,
    > [[https://huru.unsj.edu.ar/handle/123456789/321]{.underline}](https://huru.unsj.edu.ar/handle/123456789/321)

72. Intérprete automático de Lengua de Señas - SEDICI, fecha de acceso:
    > mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://sedici.unlp.edu.ar/bitstream/handle/10915/177340/Documento_completo.pdf?sequence=1]{.underline}](https://sedici.unlp.edu.ar/bitstream/handle/10915/177340/Documento_completo.pdf?sequence=1)

73. Intérprete automático de Lengua de Señas \| JAIIO, Jornadas
    > Argentinas de Informática, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://revistas.unlp.edu.ar/JAIIO/article/view/17985]{.underline}](https://revistas.unlp.edu.ar/JAIIO/article/view/17985)

74. Crean unos guantes mágicos que traducen el lenguaje de señas a texto
    > en tiempo real, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.infobae.com/tecno/2024/07/05/crean-unos-guantes-magicos-que-traducen-el-lenguaje-de-senas-a-texto-en-tiempo-real/]{.underline}](https://www.infobae.com/tecno/2024/07/05/crean-unos-guantes-magicos-que-traducen-el-lenguaje-de-senas-a-texto-en-tiempo-real/)

75. Crean gafas con inteligencia artificial para traducir lenguaje de
    > señas - Infobae, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.infobae.com/tecno/2024/04/30/crea-gafas-con-inteligencia-artificial-para-traducir-lenguaje-de-senas/]{.underline}](https://www.infobae.com/tecno/2024/04/30/crea-gafas-con-inteligencia-artificial-para-traducir-lenguaje-de-senas/)

76. La glosa: Un sistema de notación para la lengua de señas. Viviana
    > Burad, 2008. - Escritorio Modalidad Educación Especial, fecha de
    > acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[http://modalidadespecial.educ.ar/datos/recursos/pdf/la-glosa-un-sistema-de-notacion-para-la-lengua-de-senas.pdf]{.underline}](http://modalidadespecial.educ.ar/datos/recursos/pdf/la-glosa-un-sistema-de-notacion-para-la-lengua-de-senas.pdf)

77. La glosa: Un sistema de notación para la lengua de señas -- Cultura
    > \..., fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://cultura-sorda.org/la-glosa-un-sistema-de-notacion-para-la-lengua-de-senas/]{.underline}](https://cultura-sorda.org/la-glosa-un-sistema-de-notacion-para-la-lengua-de-senas/)

78. programa de lengua de señas argentina y estudios sobre las personas
    > sordas - Fundación ULSA \| Organización: Todos los cursos, fecha
    > de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://ulsa.org.ar/campus/course/index.php?categoryid=7]{.underline}](https://ulsa.org.ar/campus/course/index.php?categoryid=7)

79. Estudiantes crean un sistema para traducir la lengua de señas -
    > Educ.ar, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://www.educ.ar/recursos/120976/estudiantes-crean-un-sistema-para-traducir-la-lengua-de-sena]{.underline}](https://www.educ.ar/recursos/120976/estudiantes-crean-un-sistema-para-traducir-la-lengua-de-sena)

80. Reconocimiento de gestos dinámicos y su aplicación al lenguaje de
    > señas - CORE, fecha de acceso: mayo 15, 2025,
    > [[https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/153562887.pdf]{.underline}](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/153562887.pdf)
